# Computer Networks

A **computer network** is a "system (of) connect(ed) computers and (computer hardware)"
 which use "communications media" to transmit data
  to other members in the network.

## Communications Media

**Communications media** refer to the pathways, or methods, by which data are transmitted.
 Cable media transmit information over physical wires or cables, whereas broadcast media transmit information through electromagnetic waves.

### Cable Media

Cable media are described by their physical composition and each have advantages and disadvantages in terms of capability and cost.

**Twisted pair wire** is a medium comprised of "twisted copper wires" which is commonly used to "transmit business telephone communications".
 Twisted-pair wire is inexpensive, but "slow ... and subject to (intrusion and) interference."

**Coaxial cable** is a medium comprised of "insulated copper wire"
 and is commonly used to "transmit high-speed data traffic and television signals". Cable is "less susceptible to interference" but "more expensive and harder to work with" than twisted-pair wire.

**Fiber-optic cable** is a medium comprised of "thin ... glass fibers that transmit information via light pulses generated by lasers". Fiber provides a significant increase in bandwidth and security, but may involve great up-front investment costs, and is "harder to work with" than other cable media.

### Broadcast Media

 + Bluetooth
 + WiFi
 + Wireless Mesh Networks
 + Cellular radio
 + Satellite radio
 + Wireless Broadband

## Network Size

Computer networks are often described in terms of size:

network size | description | example(s)
--- | --- | ---
Personal Area Network (PAN) | Two ore more devices in a very limited geographical region, usually within the same room | a bluetooth connection between headphones and mobile phone
Local Area Network (LAN) | "two or more devices in a limited geographical region, usually within the same building" | a home WiFi network
Wide Area Network (WAN) | "covers a large geographic region; typically connects multiple LANs" | a university network (e.g. GWireless); the Internet

The **Internet** is a very very large computer network.

## Network Protocols

Computers connected to the Internet communicate according to a "common set of rules and procedures", or [protocols](protocols.md).

## Network Security

Computer networks are also described in terms of their level of [security](/notes/information-security-and-privacy.md).

For example, a **Virtual Private Network (VPN)** is a "a method employing encryption to provide secure access to a remote computer over the Internet" ([Oxford](http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/virtual-private-network)).
VPNs use "logins, encryption, and other techniques" to "connect users" in a secure way which "extend(s) the reach of the organization's network".

<hr>

Reference:

 + Quotes based on [Rainer 4.5, 6.1, 6.2](/README.md/#accompanying-textbook) unless otherwise noted

Additional Resources:

 + http://fcit.usf.edu/network/chap1/chap1.htm
 + http://fcit.usf.edu/network/chap4/chap4.htm
 + https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_network
 + http://study.com/academy/lesson/types-of-networks-lan-wan-wlan-man-san-pan-epn-vpn.html
 + http://www.edinformatics.com/inventions_inventors/fiber_optics.htm
